## Editing mode with contenteditable, contentEditable and designMode

In October 1998 the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) published the
„Document Object Model (DOM) Level 1 Specification“. This specification
includes an API on how to alter DOM nodes and the document’s tree\[1\].
This effectively provided a standardized way for changing a website’s
contents. With the implementations of Netscape’s JavaScript and
Microsoft’s JScript this API has been made accessible to developers.

In July 2000, with the release of Internet Explorer 5.5, Microsoft
introduced the contentEditable and designMode IDL attributes along with
the contenteditable content attribute\[2\]. These attributes were not
standardized and not part of the W3C DOM specifications.

----------------- ------------------ -------------- -------------------
Attribute         Type               Can be set to  Possible values
designMode        IDL attribute      Document       „on“, „off“
contentEditable   IDL attribute      Specific       boolean, „true“,
                                     HTMLElements   „false“, „ inherit"
contenteditable   content attribute  Specific       empty string,
                                     HTMLElements   „true“, „false“
----------------- ------------------ -------------- -------------------

By settings these settings to „true“ (contenteditable / contentEditable)
or „on“ (designMode), Internet Explorer switches the affected elements
and their children to an editing mode. In editing mode it is possible to

1.  Let the user interactively click on and type inside text elements
2.  Execute „commands“ via JScript and JavaScript

Fetching user inputs (clicking on elements, accepting keyboard input and
modifying text nodes) is handled entirely by the browser. No further
scripting is necessary other than setting the mentioned attributes on
elements. This behavior is inherited by child elements.

In editing mode, calling the method document.execCommand will format the
currently selected text depending on the parameters passed. Calling
document.execCommand('bold', false, null) will wrap the currently
selected text in &lt;b&gt; tags. document.execCommand('createLink',
false, 'http://google.com/') will wrap the selected text in a link to
google.com. However, this command will be ignored, if the current
selection is not contained by an element in editing mode.

While designMode can only be applied to the entire document,
contentEditable and contenteditable attributes can be applied to a
subset of HTML elements as described on Microsoft’s Developer Network
(MSDN) online documentation\[2\].

With the release of Internet Explorer 5.5 and the introduction of
editing capabilities, Microsoft released a sparse documentation
describing only the availability and the before-mentioned element
restrictions of these attributes\[2\].

According to Mark Pilgrim, author of the „Dive into“ book series and
contributor to the the Web Hypertext Application Technology Working
Group (WHATWG), Microsoft did not state a specific purpose for its
editing API, but, its first use-case has been rich text editing\[3\].

In March 2003, the Mozilla Foundation introduced an implementation of
Microsoft's designMode, named Midas, for their release of Mozilla 1.3.
Mozilla names this „rich-text editing support“ on the Mozilla Developer
Network (MDN)\[4\]. In June 2008, Mozilla added support for
contentEditable IDL and contenteditable content attributes with Firefox
3.

Mozilla’s editing API resembles the API implemented for Internet
Explorer, however, there are still differences (compare \[5\]\[6\]).
Most notably, Microsoft and Mozilla differ in the commands provided to
pass to document.execCommand\[6\]\[7\] and the markup generated by
invoking commands\[8\]. In fact, Mozilla only provides commands
dedicated to text editing while Microsoft offers a way to access
lower-level browser components (like the browser’s cache) using
execCommand. This may show, that even though rich-text editing was its
first use case and Mozilla implemented it naming it that, this editing
API was not originally intended to be used as such.

\[1\]
[*http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-DOM-Level-1/level-one-core.html*](http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-DOM-Level-1/level-one-core.html)

\[2\]
[*https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms537837(VS.85).aspx*](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms537837(VS.85).aspx)

\[3\]
[*https://blog.whatwg.org/the-road-to-html-5-contenteditable*](https://blog.whatwg.org/the-road-to-html-5-contenteditable)

\[4\]
[*https://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Rich-Text\_Editing\_in\_Mozilla*](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Rich-Text_Editing_in_Mozilla)

\[5\]
[*https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh772123(v=vs.85).aspx*](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh772123(v=vs.85).aspx)

\[6\]
[*https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Midas*](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Midas)

\[7\]
[*https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms533049(v=vs.85).aspx*](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms533049(v=vs.85).aspx)

\[8\]
[*https://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Rich-Text\_Editing\_in\_Mozilla\#Internet\_Explorer\_Differences*](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Rich-Text_Editing_in_Mozilla#Internet_Explorer_Differences)
